---
title: Reflections on Pandemic Legacy
---

My coworkers and I just wrapped up [Pandemic Legacy][pl] after about a year. We
started last October and finished in early September, appropriately mirroring
the in-game timeline that takes place over the course of a year.

[pl]: https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/161936/pandemic-legacy-season-1

You might be wondering - "wrapped up"? How does a board game get finished and
what's this about an in-game timeline? Well, that's the key concept behind [Rob
Daviau][rd]'s "Legacy" mechanic. Basically, the game retains state between play
sessions and this is used in Pandemic Legacy to drive the plot. [Risk
Legacy][rl] was the first in this lineage, released back in 2011, and from the
moment that I heard about the Legacy mechanic, I knew it was something I had
been wanting in a board game for a long time. Detractors complain about the
game only being designed for a limited number of sessions, but given the
average number of plays most of my board games get, just playing through an
entire Legacy game would be significantly better than usual.

[rd]: http://www.robdaviau.com/
[rl]: https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/105134/risk-legacy

I bought Risk Legacy once it was available (2011), but only managed to play it
a few times with the MacBU gaming group due to the unpopularity of the base
board game (Risk) and my leaving Microsoft in 2012. So when Pandemic Legacy was
announced, I was eager to start playing with my new coworkers at Pivotal Labs.

As it turned out, Pandemic Legacy was much more popular than Risk Legacy was,
and we had no trouble getting enough people to play about once or twice
a month. Being co-op made it much easier to coordinate games; since we were
mostly making decisions as a team rather than individually, we were easily able
to accommodate as many as six people at a time. The plot also provided more of
an incentive to make sessions happen and to stay involved with the game.

I'm looking forward to [Season 2][s2] when it comes out, even though I already
have [Seafall][sf] on pre-order. The latter should be a nice change of pace,
being a [4X][4x]-style game and more "serious"/competitive.

[s2]: http://www.polygon.com/2016/2/8/10940980/work-on-second-season-of-pandemic-legacy-has-already-begun
[sf]: https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/148261/seafall
[4x]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/4X

So with that being said, I wanted to collect some of my thoughts on
this experience, and that means **spoilers**!

---

**SPOILERS BELOW - Read on at your own risk**

---

First off, if you've already finished the game, I'd highly recommend checking
out [this Ding & Dent podcast with Rob Daviau][dd] about some of the design
decisions in the Legacy games. Unfortunately, the interview doesn't go into the
end of Pandemic Legacy, but it's still good listening if you're interested in
game design.

[dd]: https://soundcloud.com/ding-dent/bonus-episode-1-spoilers-rob-daviau-continued

## Rules mishaps

Despite Pandemic being a pretty simple game, Legacy really turns up the dials
on the overall complexity. Although I'd note that complexity != difficulty.
Using Funded Events as the self-tuning mechanism worked out much better than
I had expected.

We screwed up right out of the gate by not realizing that we had to keep
drawing through the Legacy Deck until it says stop. For those of you who have
played the game already, you'll realize that this means that we didn't find
COdA-403d until February. Oops. We made the yellow disease COdA in hindsight.

Upon reaching December, I quickly realized that we had obviously screwed
something else up - the Legacy cards referenced vaccines, which we had not
unlocked yet. After searching through the previous months' collateral (which
I was very glad we held onto), we saw that we should've unlocked the
Immunologist much earlier. We had thought we still needed to find the Gene
Sequence, not realizing that we already had it from the Virologist. So there
goes several months worth of possible vaccinating down the drain.

After a brief meeting, we decided to suck it up and give ourselves a single
boost in funding (+2 Funded Events) as a consolation going into December and
prepared ourselves for what was surely to be a tough battle to win the game.
And as it turned out...

## The Ending

We did it! We used the first half of December as a throwaway, planning on
losing to set ourselves up for hopefully winning in the second half. By
concentrating on vaccinating in the first game and searching the second, we
actually wound up winning pretty handily. To be honest, the actual win was
rather anti-climatic, as we all assumed that there would be more to do after
finding the stockpile in Atlanta, and there... wasn't.

{% include img name="final-board-state.jpg" alt="The final board state" %}

We finished with 662 points, going 9-8 overall and losing 3 of the months. So
overall, not great, but not unexpected given our relative skill at Pandemic to
start with. Most of the eastern Pacific Rim has fallen, and Europe didn't fare
so well either. On the other hand, mostly due to my exhortations, our "Trump
wall" of roadblocks across the southern United States worked out pretty well.

If we had access to vaccines when we were supposed to, it probably would've
gone better for our poor world, but c'est la vie!

## Strategy

We stuck with a base squad of Medic, Quarantine Specialist, Researcher, and
Soldier for most of our sessions, sometimes swapping out one of the latter two
depending on what objectives we were working on. (Building military bases, for
example.) While the Medic and Quarantine Specialist would work on board control
and making sure that we didn't just flat out lose, we would be working on the
other objectives with the other characters. The Soldier's ability to pull
equipment from the discard pile was heavily abused throughout the game
(generally for searching), and it certainly didn't hurt that he didn't get
Scars from COdA.

That being said though, we did a terrible job upgrading characters and
remembering to use both special abilities and relationships. In hindsight,
having the Forecaster ability on the Medic instead of the Quarantine Specialist
was a waste, and we could've been much smarter about relationships between what
became our main team. There were many choices made that we wound up regretting.

Our traitor wound up being the Operations Expert, appropriately enough. It
wasn't a big deal, as we had already made all the military bases on the board
permanent. It actually worked out pretty well, since by the end of the game, we
had lost most of our research stations and mainly relied on the military bases
for movement around the world.

The nuke was one of the more amusing upgrades for our group. Once it was
unlocked, we immediately chose it as one of the game end upgrades. (I'd be
curious if any group doesn't actually do this - it was a no-brainer for us just
for the flavor.) We did barely manage to restrain ourselves from using the nuke
until December, but we couldn't finish out the game without actually using it.
And if you looked carefully at the end state of our board above, you might have
noticed some extra icons around Lagos:

{% include img name="nuked-lagos.jpg" alt="Nuked Lagos" %}

## Summary

Zombies and a secret government conspiracy are perhaps unoriginal or
uninspired, but given the constraints of the medium, I was entirely happy with
the choices and how it played out. The way the game self-balances between
getting additional upgrades and funding worked much better than I originally
thought, and the ability to massage the difficulty with those variables became
invaluable when we discovered our rules mistake in December. (If we had lost
due to that, I would've been pretty salty.)

Overall, I'm not planning on continuing to play past the end or starting a new
playthrough, but I very much enjoyed the experience and it was definitely worth
the time and money. For all the complaints about Legacy games being "finished",
Pandemic Legacy was a great success at work and the game that we played the
most, since like a TV season, once you're invested, you have an incentive to
see it through to the end. In that aspect, it was perfect for our game group at
work, providing a forcing function for us to actually schedule our sessions.
